@c -*- mode: texinfo -*-
\input texinfo

@c %**start of header
@setfilename info/folding
@settitle folding
@documentencoding ISO-8859-1
@c %**end of header

@c This file was trivially adapted from emacs-goodies-el.texi
@c EDITION 30.2
@c UPDATED 25 Nov 2009
@c Copyright: 2000-2003 Roland Mas <lolando@debian.org>,
@c  2005-2014 Peter S Galbraith <psg@debian.org>
@c  2014 Julian Gilbey <jdg@debian.org>
@c License: GPL-2+

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Folding: (folding).  Folding editor minor mode for Emacs.
@end direntry

@node Top, folding Installation, (dir), (dir)
@noindent Author:      Jamie Lokier    <jamie@@imbolc.ucc.ie>
Jari Aalto      <jari.aalto@@poboxes.com>
Anders Lindgren <andersl@@csd.uu.se>
@menu
* folding Installation::
* folding Documentation::
* folding Customization::
* folding Examples::
@end menu

     This package provides a minor mode, compatible with all major
     editing modes, for folding (hiding) parts of the edited text or
     program.

     Folding mode handles a document as a tree, where each branch
     is bounded by special markers @{@{@{ and @}@}@}. A branch can be
     placed inside another branch, creating a complete hierarchical
     structure.

     Folding mode can CLOSE a fold, leaving only the initial `@{@{@{'
     and possibly a comment visible.

     It can also ENTER a fold, which means that only the current
     fold will be visible, all text above `@{@{@{' and below `@}@}@}'
     will be invisible.

     Please note, that the maintainers do not recommend to use only
     folding for you your code layout and navigation. Folding.el is
     on its best when it can "chunk" large sections of code inside
     folds. The larger the chunks, the more the usability of
     folding will increase. Folding.el is not meant to hide
     individual functions: you may be better served by hideshow.el
     or imenu.el (which can parse the function indexes)

@node folding Installation

     The best way to use folding is to turn it on explicitely when
     needed using @command{M-x folding-mode}.

     But if you always use folding, then consider adding these lines
     to your @file{~/.emacs} file:

@example
         (if (load "folding" 'nomessage 'noerror)
             (folding-mode-add-find-file-hook))
@end example

     The same folding marks can be used in `vim' editor command
     "set fdm=marker".

@noindent To remove folding, call `M-x' `folding-uninstall'.

@node folding Documentation, folding Customization, folding Installation, Top

@noindent Tutorial

     To start folding mode, give the command: @command{M-x
folding-mode}. The mode line should contain the string "Fld"
indicating that folding mode is activated.

     When loading a document containing fold marks, Folding mode is
automatically started and all folds are closed. For example when
loading my init file, only the following lines (plus a few lines of
comments) are visible:

@verbatim
;;{{{ General...
;;{{{ Keyboard...
;;{{{ Packages...
;;{{{ Major modes...
;;{{{ Minor modes...
;;{{{ Debug...
@end verbatim

     To enter a fold, use @key{C-c @ >}. To show it without entering, use
@key{C-c @ C-s}, which produces this display:

@verbatim
;;{{{ Minor modes

;;{{{ Follow mode...
;;{{{ Font-lock mode...
;;{{{ Folding...

;;}}}
@end verbatim

     To show everything, just as the file would look like if Folding
mode hadn't been activated, give the command @command{M-x
folding-open-buffer}, normally bound to @key{C-c @ C-o}.  To
close all folds and go to the top level, the command
@command{folding-whole-buffer} could be used.

@noindent Mouse support

     Folding mode v2.0 introduced mouse support. Folds can be shown or
hidden by simply clicking on a fold mark using mouse button 3.  The
mouse routines have been designed to call the original function bound
to button 3 when the user didn't click on a fold mark.

@noindent The menu

     A menu is placed in the "Tools" menu. Should no Tools menu exist
(Emacs 19.28) the menu will be placed in the menu bar.

@noindent ISearch

     When searching using the incremental search (C-s) facilities,
folds will be automagically entered and closed.

@noindent Problems

    Uneven fold marks

     Oops, I just deleted some text, and a fold mark got deleted!
What should I do?  Trust me, you will eventually do this sometime. the
easiest way is to open the buffer using @command{folding-open-buffer}
(@key{C-c @ C-o}) and add the fold mark by hand. To find mismatching
fold marks, the package `occur' is useful. The command:

@verbatim
         M-x occur RET {{{\|}}} RET
@end verbatim

     will extract all lines containing folding marks and present them
in a separate buffer.

     Even though all folding marks are correct, Folding mode sometimes
gets confused, especially when entering and leaving folds very
often. To get it back on track, press @key{C-g} a few times and give the
command @command{folding-open-buffer} (@key{C-c @ C-o}).

    Fold must have a label

     When you make a fold, be sure to write some text for the name of
the fold, otherwise there may be an error "extraneous fold mark..."
Write like this:

@verbatim
         ;;{{{ Note
         ;;}}}
@end verbatim

     instead of

@verbatim
         ;;{{{
         ;;}}}
@end verbatim

    folding-whole-buffer doesn't fold whole buffer

     If you call commands @command{folding-open-buffer} and
@command{folding-whole-buffer} and notice that there are open fold
sections in the buffer, then you have mismatch of folds somewhere. Run
@command{M-x occur} and type the regexp @code{@{@{@{\|@}@}@}} to check where
is the extra open or closing fold mark.

@noindent Folding and outline modes

     Folding mode is not the same as Outline mode, a major and minor
mode which is part of the Emacs distribution. The two packages do,
however, resemble each other very much.  The main differences between
the two packages are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Folding mode uses explicit marks, @code{@{@{@{} and `@}@}@}', to
mark the beginning and the end of a branch.
Outline, on the other other hand, tries to use already
existing marks, like the `\section' string in a TeX
document.

@item
Outline mode has no end marker which means that it is
impossible for text to follow a sub-branch.

@item
Folding mode use the same markers for branches on all depths,
Outline mode requires that marks should be longer the
further, down in the tree you go, e.g `\chap', \section',
`\subsection', `\subsubsection'. This is needed to
distinguish the next mark at the current or higher levels
from a sub-branch, a problem caused by the lack of
end-markers.

@item
Folding mode has mouse support, you can navigate through a
folded document by clicking on fold marks. (The XEmacs version
of Outline mode has mouse support.)

@item
The Isearch facilities of Folding is capable of
automatically to open folds. Under Outline, the the entire
document must be opened prior isearch.
@end itemize

     In conclusion, Outline mode is useful when the document being
edited contains natural markers, like LaTeX. When writing code natural
markers are hard to find, except if you're happy with one function per
fold (I'm not).

@noindent Personal reflections by Anders Lindgren

     When writing this, version 2.0 of Folding mode is just about to
be released. The current version has proven itself stable during a
months of testing period. In other words: we haven't had time to touch
the folding for quite some time.

     Our plan was from the beginning to rewrite the entire package,
including replacing the core of the program, written using old Emacs
technology (selective display), and replace it with modern
equivalences, like overlays or text-properties for Emacs and extents
for XEmacs.

     Unfortunately, this has not yet been done, even though we have
implemented most other items on our to-do agenda.

     It is not likely that any of us, even in the near future, will
find the time required to rewrite the core of the package. Since the
package, in it's current state, is much more powerful than the
original, we have decided to release this code.

@node folding Customization, folding Examples, folding Documentation, Top

@noindent Customization: general

     The behavior of Folding mode is controlled mainly by a set of
Emacs Lisp variables. This section will discuss the most useful ones,
for more details please see the code. The descriptions below assumes
that you know a bit about how to use simple Emacs Lisp and knows how
to edit ~/.emacs, your init file.

@noindent Customization: hooks

     The normal procedure when customizing a package is to write a
function doing the customization. The function is then added to a hook
which is called at an appropriate time. (Please see the example
section below.)  The following hooks are available:
@table @samp
@item folding-mode-hook
Called when folding mode is activated.
@item <major mode>-folding-hook
Called when starting folding mode in a buffer with major
mode set to <major mode>. (e.g. When editing C code
the hook `c-mode-folding-hook' is called.)
@item folding-load-hook
Called when folding mode is loaded into Emacs.
@end table

@noindent Customization: The Mouse

     The variable @code{folding-behave-table} contains the actions
which should be performed when the user clicks on an open fold, a
closed fold etc.  For example, if you prefer to `enter' a fold rather
than `open' it you should rebind this variable.

     The variable @code{folding-default-mouse-keys-function} contains
the name of the function used to bind your mouse keys. To use your own
mouse bindings, create a function, say
@command{my-folding-bind-mouse}, and set this variable to it.

@noindent Customization: Keymaps

     When Emacs 19.29 was released, the keymap was divided into strict
parts. (This division existed before, but a lot of packages, even the
ones delivered with Emacs, ignored them.)

@verbatim
         C-c <letter>    -- Reserved for the users private keymap.
         C-c C-<letter>  -- Major mode. (Some other keys are
                            reserved as well.)
         C-c <Punctuation Char> <Whatever>
                         -- Reserved for minor modes.
@end verbatim

     The reason why @key{C-c@@} was chosen as the default prefix is
that it is used by outline-minor-mode. It is not likely that few
people will try to use folding and outline at the same time.

     However, old key bindings have been kept if possible.  The
variable @code{folding-default-keys-function} specifies which function
should be called to bind the keys. There are various function to
choose from how user can select the keybindings.  To use the old key
bindings, add the following line to your init file:

@verbatim
         (setq folding-default-keys-function
               'folding-bind-backward-compatible-keys)
@end verbatim

     To define keys similar to the keys used by Outline mode, use:

@verbatim
         (setq folding-default-keys-function
               'folding-bind-outline-compatible-keys)
@end verbatim

@noindent Customization: adding new major modes

     To add fold marks for a new major mode, use the function
@command{folding-add-to-marks-list}. Example:

@verbatim
         (folding-add-to-marks-list
          'c-mode "/* {{{ " "/* }}} */" " */" t)
         (folding-add-to-marks-list
          'java-mode "// {{{ " "// }}}" nil t)
@end verbatim

@noindent Customization: ISearch

     If you don't like the extension folding.el applies to isearch,
set the variable `folding-isearch-install' to nil before loading this
package.

@node folding Examples,  , folding Customization, Top

@noindent Example: personal setup

     To define your own key binding instead of using the standard
ones, you can do like this:

@verbatim
          (setq folding-mode-prefix-key "\C-c")
          ;;
          (setq folding-default-keys-function
              '(folding-bind-backward-compatible-keys))
          ;;
          (setq folding-load-hook 'my-folding-load-hook)


          (defun my-folding-load-hook ()
            "Folding setup."

            (folding-install)  ;; just to be sure

            ;; ............................................... markers ...

            ;;  Change text-mode fold marks. Handy for quick
            ;;  sh/perl/awk code

            (defvar folding-mode-marks-alist nil)

            (let* ((ptr (assq 'text-mode folding-mode-marks-alist)))
              (setcdr ptr (list "# {{{" "# }}}")))

            ;; ........................................ bindings ...

            ;;  Put `folding-whole-buffer' and `folding-open-buffer'
            ;;  close together.

            (defvar folding-mode-prefix-map nil)

            (define-key folding-mode-prefix-map "\C-w" nil)
            (define-key folding-mode-prefix-map "\C-s"
                        'folding-show-current-entry)
            (define-key folding-mode-prefix-map "\C-p"
                        'folding-whole-buffer))
@end verbatim

@noindent Example: changing default fold marks

     In case you're not happy with the default folding marks, you can
change them easily. Here is an example

@verbatim
         (setq folding-load-hook 'my-folding-load-hook)

         (defun my-folding-load-hook ()
           "Folding vars setup."
           (let* ((ptr (assq 'text-mode folding-mode-marks-alist)))
             (setcdr ptr (list "# {{{" "# }}}"))))
@end verbatim


@noindent Example: choosing different fold marks for mode

     Suppose you sometimes want to use different fold marks for the
major mode: e.g. to alternate between "# @{@{@{" and "@{@{@{" in `text-mode'
Call @command{M-x my-folding-text-mode-setup} to change the marks.

@verbatim
   (defun my-folding-text-mode-setup (&optional use-custom-folding-marks)
     (interactive
       (list (y-or-n-p "Use Custom fold marks now? ")))
     (let* ((ptr (assq major-mode folding-mode-marks-alist))
            (default-begin "# {{{")
            (default-end   "# }}}")
            (begin "{{{")
            (end   "}}}"))
       (when (eq major-mode 'text-mode)
         (unless use-custom-folding-marks
           (setq  begin default-begin  end default-end)))
       (setcdr ptr (list begin end))
       (folding-set-marks begin end)))
@end verbatim

@noindent Example: AucTex setup

     Suppose you're using comment.sty with AucTeX for editing LaTeX2e
documents and you have these comment types. You would like to be able
to set which of these 3 is to be folded at any one time, using a
simple key sequence: move back and forth easily between the different
comment types, e.g., "unfold everything then fold on \x".

@verbatim
         \O   ...  \endO
         \L   ...  \endL
         \B   ...  \endB

         (setq folding-load-hook 'my-folding-load-hook)

         (defun my-folding-load-hook ()
           "Folding vars setup."
           (let ((ptr (assq 'text-mode folding-mode-marks-alist)))
             (setcdr ptr (list "\\O" "\\endO"))
             (define-key folding-mode-prefix-map "C"
                        'my-folding-marks-change)))

         (defun my-folding-marks-change (&optional selection)
           "Select folding marks: prefixes nil, C-u and C-u C-u."
           (interactive "P")
           (let ((ptr (assq major-mode folding-mode-marks-alist))
                 input)
             (when (string-match "^\\(plain-\\|la\\|auc\\)?tex-"
                                 (symbol-name  major-mode))
               (setq input
                     (read-string "Latex \\end(X) Marker (default O): "
                                  nil nil "O" nil))
               (setq input (upcase input))
               (turn-off-folding-mode)
               (folding-add-to-marks-list
                major-mode
                (concat "\\" input) (concat "\\end" input) nil nil t)
               ;; (setcdr ptr (list (concat "\\" input) (concat "\\end" input)))
               (turn-on-folding-mode))))
         ;;  End of example
@end verbatim
